Documentation for Akka Persistence Typed (java) (#2435)
lagom/lagom: docs/manual/java/guide/cluster/UsingAkkaPersistenceTyped.md

## Encoding the model

First, create a class (ie: `ShoppingCartEntity`) extending the abstract class `EventSourcedBehaviorWithEnforcedReplies`.  It's recommended to use `EventSourcedBehaviorWithEnforcedReplies` when modeling a CQRS Aggregate. Using [enforced replies](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/persistence.html?language=Java#replies) requires command handlers to return a `ReplyEffect` forcing the developers to be explicit about replies.

@[shopping-cart-entity](code/docs/home/persistence/ShoppingCartEntity.java)

`EventSourcedBehaviorWithEnforcedReplies` has three type parameters (Command, Event and State) and a few mandatory and optional methods that will be implemented as we progress through the guide.

All model classes (`ShoppingCartEntity.Command`, `ShoppingCartEntity.Event`, `ShoppingCartEntity.ShoppingCart`) will be defined as static inner classes of `ShoppingCartEntity`.

### Modelling the State

The state of the shopping cart is defined as following:

@[shopping-cart-state](code/docs/home/persistence/ShoppingCartEntity.java)

> The `ShoppingCart` has a `checkedOutTime` that can be set when transitioning from one state (open shopping cart) to another (checked-out shopping cart). As we will see later, each state encodes the commands it can handle, which events it can persist, and to which other states it can transition.

Reviewer: `checkedOutTime` here and `checkoutDate` in the code. Since the Scala version uses `checkedOutTime`, I would change the code instead.

> > **Note**: This is not the recommended technique, though. Whenever your model goes through different state transitions, the recommendation is to have a trait and extensions of it for each state. See examples in the [style guide for Akka Persistence Typed](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/persistence-style.html?language=Java).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note**: This is not the recommended technique, though. Whenever your model goes through different state transitions, the recommendation is to have an interface and implementations of it for each state. See examples in the [style guide for Akka Persistence Typed](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/persistence-style.html?language=Java).
```

Reviewer 2: As a user reading this for the first time I'd find "This is not the recommended technique" annoying: "So, here's how you do something, except this is not the way to do it, and you should do it that other way".

Instead I think we could rephrase to:

```suggestion
> **Note**: The sample shown above is a simplified case. Whenever your model goes through different state transitions, a better approach is to have an interface and implementations of it for each state. See examples in the [style guide for Akka Persistence Typed](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/persistence-style.html?language=Java).
```

### Modelling Commands and Replies

Next, we define the commands that we can send to it.

> Each command defines a [reply](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/persistence.html?language=Java#replies) through a `ActorRef<R> replyTo` field where `R` is the reply that will be sent back to the caller. Replies are used to communicate back if a command was accepted or rejected or to read the aggregate data (ie: read-only commands). It is also possible to have a mix of both. For example, if the command succeeds, it returns some updated data; if it fails, it returns a rejected message. Or you can have commands without replies (ie: fire-and-forget). This is a less common pattern in CQRS Aggregate modeling though and not covered in this example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each command defines a [reply](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/persistence.html?language=Java#replies) through a `ActorRef<R> replyTo` field where `R` is the reply type that will be sent back to the caller. Replies are used to communicate back if a command was accepted or rejected or to read the aggregate data (ie: read-only commands). It is also possible to have a mix of both. For example, if the command succeeds, it returns some updated data; if it fails, it returns a rejected message. Or you can have commands without replies (ie: `fire-and-forget`). This is a less common pattern in CQRS Aggregate modeling though and not covered in this example.
```

 - `s/where `R` is the reply type that/where `R` is the reply *type* that`
 - backticks in `fire-and-forget`. I wanted this to have the same style to `at-most-once`but we're inconsistent in the format of `at-most-once` vs (plain style) at-most-once. Still, it looks like some styling (`code`, _italics_, ...) should be used. 🤔

@[shopping-cart-commands](code/docs/home/persistence/ShoppingCartEntity.java)

> In Akka Typed, it's not possible to return an exception to the caller. All communication between the actor and the caller must be done via the `ActorRef<R> replyTo` passed in the command. Therefore, if you want to signal a rejection, you most have it encoded in your reply protocol.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Akka Typed, unlike Akka classic and Lagom Persistence, it's not possible to return an exception to the caller. All communication between the actor and the caller must be done via the `ActorRef<R> replyTo` passed in the command. Therefore, if you want to signal a rejection, you most have it encoded in your reply protocol.
```

> The replies used by the commands above are define like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The replies used by the commands above are defined like this:
```

typo

@[shopping-cart-replies](code/docs/home/persistence/ShoppingCartEntity.java)

> Here there are two different kinds of replies: `Confirmation` used when we want to modify the state. A modification request can be `Accepted` or `Rejected`. The `Summary` is used when we want to read the state of the shopping cart.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here there are two different kinds of replies: `Confirmation` and `Summary`. `confirmation` is used when we want to modify the state. A modification request can be `Accepted` or `Rejected`. Then, the `Summary` is used when we want to read the state of the shopping cart.
```

> **Note**: Keep in mind that `Summary` is not the shopping cart itself, but the representation we want to expose to the external world. It's a good practice to keep the internal state of the aggregate private because it allows the internal state, and the exposed API to evolve independently.

### Modelling Events

> Next, we define the events that our model will persist. The events must extend Lagom's [`AggregateEvent`](api/com/lightbend/lagom/javadsl/persistence/AggregateEvent.html). This is important for tagging events. We will cover this topic a little further.

Reviewer 2: Prefer `We will cover this topic in [section name](section link)` over `We will cover this topic a little further` (which adds adds some mistery 🕵🏼‍♂️ but can be confusing 🤔 ).

@[shopping-cart-events](code/docs/home/persistence/ShoppingCartEntity.java)

### Defining Commands Handlers

> Once you define your protocol in terms of Commands, Replies, Events, and State, you need to specify the business rules of your model. The command handlers define how to handle each incoming command, which validations must be applied, and finally, which events will be persisted if any.

Reviewer 2: option a:

```suggestion
Once you've defined your model in terms of Commands, Replies, Events, and State, you need to specify the business rules. The command handlers define how to handle each incoming command, which validations must be applied, and finally, which events will be persisted if any.
```

Reviewer 2: option b:

```suggestion
Once you've defined the Commands, Replies, Events, and State, you need to specify the business rules of your model. The command handlers define how to handle each incoming command, which validations must be applied, and finally, which events will be persisted if any.
```

Reviewer 2: Both suggestions fix the `s/you define/you've defined` and the offer alternatives to the use of `protocol`.

I'd rather reserve `protocol` for messages the user interacts with (commands, replies and events, but not state) if that makes sense.

@[shopping-cart-command-handlers](code/docs/home/persistence/ShoppingCartEntity.java)

> **Note**: of course, it is possible to organize the command handlers in a way that you consider more convenient for your use case, but we recommend the `onCommand` pattern since it can help to keep the logic for each command well isolated.

Command handlers are the meat of the model. They encode the business rules of your model and act as a guardian of the model consistency. The command handler must first validate that the incoming command can be applied to the current model state. In case of successful validation, one or more events expressing the mutations are persisted. Once the events are persisted, they are applied to the state producing a new valid state.

Because an Aggregate is intended to model a consistency boundary, it's not recommended validating commands using data that is not available in scope. Any decision should be solely based on the data passed in the commands and the state of the Aggregate. Any external call should be considered a smell because it means that the Aggregate is not in full control of the invariants it's supposed to be protecting.

> There are two ways of sending back a reply: using `Effect.reply` and `Effect.persist(...).thenReply`. The first one is available directly on `Effect` and should be used when you reply without persisting any event. In this case, you can use the available state in scope because it's guaranteed not to have changed. The second variant should be used when you have persisted one or more events. The updated state is then available to you on the function used to define the reply.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two ways of sending back a reply: using `Effect().reply` and `Effect().persist(...).thenReply`. The first one is available directly on `Effect` and should be used when you reply without persisting any event. In this case, you can use the available state in scope because it's guaranteed not to have changed. The second variant should be used when you have persisted one or more events. The updated state is then available to you on the function used to define the reply.
```

To locate the correct actor across the cluster, you need to specify the `EntityTypeKey` we used to initialize the entity and the `id` for the instance we need. Akka Cluster will create the required actor in one node on the cluster or reuse the existing instance if the actor has already been created and is still alive.

The `EntityRef` is similar to an `ActorRef` but denotes the actor is sharded. Interacting with an `EntityRef` implies the messages exchanged with the actor may need to travel over the wire to another node.

#### Considerations on using the ask pattern

Since we want to send commands to the Aggregate and these commands declare a reply we will need to use the [ask pattern](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/interaction-patterns.html?language=Java#request-response).

The code we introduced below creates an `EntityRef` from inside the `ShoppingCartServiceImpl` meaning we are calling the actor (the `EntityRef`) from outside the `ActorSystem`. `EntityRef` provides an `ask()` overload out of the box meant to be used from outside actors.

@[shopping-cart-service-call](code/docs/home/persistence/ShoppingCartServiceImpl.java)

> So we declare an implicit `timeout` and then invoke `ask` (which uses the timeout implicitly). The `ask` method accepts a function of `ActorRef[Res] => M` in which `Res` is the expected response type and `M` is the message being sent to the actor. The `ask` method will create an instance of `ActorRef[Res]` that can be used to build the outgoing message (command). Once the response is sent to `ActorRef[Res]`, Akka will complete the returned `CompletionStage<Res>` with the response (in this case `CompletionStage[ShoppingCartSummary]`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So we declare an `askTimeout` and then invoke `ask`. The `ask` method accepts a function of `ActorRef<Res> -> M` in which `Res` is the expected response type and `M` is the message being sent to the actor. The `ask` method will create an instance of `ActorRef<Res>` that can be used to build the outgoing message (command). Once the response is sent to `ActorRef<Res>`, Akka will complete the returned `CompletionStage<Res>` with the response (in this case `CompletionStage<ShoppingCartSummary>`).
```

> Finally, we operate over the `cartSummary` (in this case, we map it to a different type, ie: `ShoppingCartView`, using the `thenApply` method).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we operate over the `summary` (in this case, we map it to a different type, ie: `ShoppingCartView`, using the `thenApply` method).
```

See the [Akka Cluster Sharding documentation](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/cluster-sharding.html?language=Java#shard-allocation) for details on how to configure the number of shards.

### Configuring Entity passivation

Keeping all the Aggregates in memory all the time is inefficient. Instead, use the Entity passivation feature, then sharded entities (the Aggregates) are removed from the cluster when they've been unused for some time.

Akka supports both [programmatic passivation](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/cluster-sharding.html?language=Java#passivation) and [automatic passivation](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/typed/cluster-sharding.html?language=Java#automatic-passivation). The default values for automatic passivation are generally good enough.

## Data Serialization

> The messages (commands, replies) and the durable classes (events, state snapshots) need to be serializable to be sent over the wire across the cluster or be stored on the database. Akka recommends [Jackson-based serializers](https://doc.akka.io/docs/akka/2.6/serialization-jackson.html?language=Java) --preferably JSON, but CBOR is also supported-- as a good default in most cases. On top of Akka serializers, Lagom makes it easy to add [[Play-JSON serialization|SerializationPlayJson]] support, which may be more familiar to some Scala developers.

Reviewer: Is this Play-JSON discussion relevant to Java users? They will use Jackson for everything, so I think this can be removed from here.

Author: The goal was to remove it. I removed a few paragraphs, but missed this sentence.
